feat: charter (#2)
NativeScript/management: nativescript-charter.md

No more than two-thirds of the TSC members may be affiliated with the same employer. If a change in TSC membership or a change of employment by a TSC member creates a situation where more than two-thirds of the TSC membership shares an employer, then the situation must be immediately remedied by the removal of a member affiliated with the over-represented employer(s).

The TSC shall meet regularly using tools that enable participation by the community (e.g. weekly on a Zoom meeting, or through any other appropriate means selected by the TSC). The meeting shall be directed by the TSC Chairperson. Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by the TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording shall be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.

TSC members are expected to regularly participate in TSC meetings and issue triaging.

> A TSC member is automatically removed if they do not participate in at least 2 annual meetings.

Reviewer: - "annual meetings" are not defined in this doc.  is it defined somewhere else?
- "automatic" removal of members can be contentious.  consider revising

Author: Thank you for the feedback @ctcpip - Paragraph has been updated with rewording as follows to clarify the meeting schedule:
> The TSC shall meet once a month

And the language has been softened around the 2 or more rule:

> TSC membership may be reconsidered if a member misses two or more monthly meetings.

# NativeScript Charter

## Section 0. Guiding Principle

NativeScript is part of the OpenJS Foundation. The project operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. Project proposals, timelines, and status must not merely be open, but also easily visible to outsiders.

## Section 1. Scope

NativeScript brings native platform APIs directly into the JavaScript runtime, enriched with robust TypeScript typings, ensuring a seamless and powerful development experience. As an open-source framework for building applications across iOS, visionOS, Android, macOS, and more, it uniquely blends familiar web development paradigms—such as CSS styling and template-driven views—with popular native languages including Swift, Kotlin, Objective-C, and Java. This integration offers developers unparalleled flexibility and ease.
Its intuitive CLI further simplifies interaction with native platform development processes, making native development approachable for JavaScript developers.

### 1.1: In-scope

> Section Intentionally Left Blank

Reviewer 2: I believe these sections are mandatory, no?

Author: Sounds like these can be left blank since the charter can address the scope.

Reviewer 3: You can leave as is. That's fine.

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

Section Intentionally Left Blank

## Section 2. Relationship with OpenJS Foundation CPC.

> Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of NativeScript, it is delegated to the NativeScript Technical Steering Committee ("TSC"). OpenJS Foundation's business leadership is the Board of Directors (the "Board").

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is a bit odd for me, specifically the correlation of "OpenJS Foundation's business leadership is the Board of Directors (the "Board").

> Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of NativeScript, it is delegated to the NativeScript Technical Steering Committee ("TSC"). OpenJS Foundation's business leadership is the Board of Directors (the "Board").

Author: ```suggestion
Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of NativeScript, it is delegated to the NativeScript Technical Steering Committee ("TSC").
```

I agree @ovflowd I've removed that last sentence.

This charter can only be amended with the approval of the CPC.

## Section 3. Establishment of the TSC

> TSC memberships are not time-limited. There is no maximum size of the TSC.

Reviewer 4: would it be wise to time-limit memberships, and/or require recertification?

> TSC memberships are not time-limited. There is no maximum size of the TSC.

Author: ```suggestion
TSC memberships are reviewed every 2 years. Upon review, the TSC meeting attendance of members as well as contributions to the project and community are considered. There is a minimum number of 5 members required to manage the project. There is no maximum size of the TSC.
```

Good idea @ljharb, I think it makes sense in NativeScript's case to have membership reviews every 2 years as it is a large project covering wide surface are and it does receive diverse feedback and participation within broad windows.

Reviewer 4: who does this review? in particular, if there's 5 TSC members, who can decide to remove 1 of them?

Author: Solid point :) I think we may want to follow a similar min/max size as Node if there’s a good precedent on that within their team.

> The TSC may add additional members to the TSC through meeting consensus. The consensus requires at least five TSC members to be present to approve a new member.  A TSC member can be removed from the TSC by voluntary resignation or by a standard TSC motion.

Reviewer 4: What is a "standard TSC motion"? (is it defined anywhere?) If there are 5 members present, does the one being removed get to participate in this consensus?

(some of the below sections might answer all my questions, though)

Author: We're sticking with language/inspiration from https://webpack.js.org/contribute/Governance-Overview/.

Reviewer 4: Unfortunately that may not be a good exemplar, since it too fails to describe how a TSC member may be removed (or even added). It does link to node's TSC charter, though, which makes it seem like an oversight (cc @ovflowd).

> The TSC may add additional members to the TSC through meeting consensus. The consensus requires at least five TSC members to be present to approve a new member.  A TSC member can be removed from the TSC by voluntary resignation or by consensus with at least five members present.

Reviewer: if five TSC members is the required quorum for changing the composition of the TSC, then the charter needs to stipulate the minimum size of the TSC

Author: Thank you @ctcpip see comment above; I added the minimum `There is a minimum number of 5 members required to manage the project.`.

Reviewer: Thank you for the prompt reply! Although, as written, the minimum cannot be the same as the number required for quorum.  For example, if the TSC has a size of five, it is impossible for any member to be removed for any reason under the current language. This is problematic because:

- Any member of the TSC could:
  - remain on the TSC indefinitely, regardless of what all other members of the TSC think
    - because they are one out of five, they could always withhold consensus, thus guaranteeing they can never be removed from the TSC
  - prevent any new individuals from joining the TSC
    - because they are one out of five, they could always withhold consensus, thus guaranteeing no new members could ever be added to the TSC

Reviewer: one idea could be that for TSC addition/removal, if consensus cannot be reached, then a vote may be called -- but consider carefully the threshold if the quorum required is equal to the minimum size of the TSC (five members): to meet the 2/3 requirement in this scenario, you would need ALL other TSC members (four out of five) to agree

Author: That makes sense; is there a min/max with Node? We may follow their same member structure and quorum rule.

Reviewer: Have a look here:  `https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/blob/main/TSC-Charter.md#section-3-establishment-of-the-tsc`

Author: This is clarified now and adopts the standard node charter language.

# NativeScript Charter

## Section 0. Guiding Principle

NativeScript is part of the OpenJS Foundation. The project operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. Project proposals, timelines, and status must not merely be open, but also easily visible to outsiders.

## Section 1. Scope

NativeScript provides platform APIs directly to the JavaScript runtime (with strong types) for a rich TypeScript development experience. As an open-source framework to develop apps for iOS, visionOS, Android, macOS and other platforms combining a best of all worlds approach marrying familiar Web approaches like CSS and view templating with common platform languages (Swift, Kotlin, Objective-C, Java) it delivers a liberating toolset for developers.

> It combines a node based CLI as an approachable interaction point for JavaScript developers to interact with native platform development spanning Xcode and Android Studio processes.

Reviewer 5: Since this document will be difficult to change, it might be better to leave this more genric, e.g. 
```It combines a CLI as an approachable interaction point for JavaScript developers to interact with native platform development processes.```

### 1.1: In-scope

Section Intentionally Left Blank

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

Section Intentionally Left Blank

## Section 2. Relationship with OpenJS Foundation CPC.

Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of NativeScript, it is delegated to the NativeScript Technical Steering Committee ("TSC"). OpenJS Foundation's business leadership is the Board of Directors (the "Board").

This charter can only be amended with the approval of the CPC.

## Section 3. Establishment of the TSC

TSC members can be either _regular_ members or _voting_ members. Regular members can attend meetings and participate in TSC discussions, but do not vote. Voting members can do everything regular members can do, and also have the ability to cast votes when consensus is not reached on an issue.

TSC memberships are not time-limited. There is no maximum size of the TSC. The TSC must have at least four voting members.

> The TSC may add additional voting members to the TSC through meeting consensus. The consensus requires at least five TSC members to be present to approve a new voting member.  A TSC member can be removed from the TSC by voluntary resignation or by consensus with at least five voting members to be present. A vote in a TSC meeting can be used to change a regular TSC member to a voting TSC member, or to change a voting TSC member to a regular TSC member.

Reviewer 6: > The TSC must have at least four voting members.

> The consensus requires at least five TSC members to be present to approve a new voting member.

I believe we would want both to be 5, since technically if we only have 4 voting members, no new members can ever be added/voted in?

Author: Just to clarify on that point, TSC can be of any size, just that the voting member pool is a limited size to help facilitate efficient decision making. 
> The TSC may add additional voting members to the TSC through meeting consensus.
which can occur anytime so voting members can change via discussion/agreement.
